# qdesire
qdesire - Quantum Differential Equations Solver with Iterative Refinement and Error control

# Thesis abstract (Quantum algorithms for solving differential equations)

This thesis is situated in the field of Quantum Computing, a rapidly growing branch of quantum technologies, which relies on the ability to manipulate coherent quantum states to solve problems.
The fundamental unit of quantum information is the qubit, a two-level quantum system represented by $\ket{0}$ and $\ket{1}$, which form the computational basis. The generic state of a qubit can be expressed as a quantum superposition of the two eigenstates, and operations can be performed on it using quantum gates, the quantum counterpart of traditional logic gates. A sequence of quantum gates applied to a multi-qubit system is called a quantum circuit. Properly designing a quantum circuit is crucial in the development of quantum algorithms.
This thesis utilizes the \textit{Qiskit} package, developed by IBM, which allows for both simulating quantum circuits' behavior on classical hardware and programming real quantum processors in the cloud.

The thesis aims to develop a quantum algorithm for solving \textit{ordinary differential equations} (ODEs), specifically focusing on the damped harmonic oscillator equation. For this purpose, variational quantum circuits are considered, which are circuits dependent on a set of parameters to be optimized.
In this context, a variational circuit is associated with the unknown time-dependent function $f(t)$, and its derivatives are calculated using the \textit{Parameter-shift Rule}. This method provides an exact way to compute derivatives, unlike many classical algorithms that rely on finite differences.
The thesis describes the strategy used to approximate the solution of the differential equation by optimizing the parameters of the input variational circuit. The optimization is performed to minimize an appropriate cost function that quantifies the quality of the provided solution. Two optimization algorithms, called \textit{COBYLA} and \textit{Adam}, are used for this purpose.
The experimental procedure involved examining various variational quantum circuits to analyze the performance of the developed algorithm, considering different circuit topologies, varying the number of qubits, degrees of freedom to be optimized, quantum gates, and the amount of entanglement.
The analyses were evaluated for systems with a different number of qubits, up to a maximum of 6. The results indicated that, with an increase in the number of qubits and degrees of freedom in the circuit, the cost function (the mean squared error compared to the exact solution) improves by a factor of approximately 3 when going from 2 to 6 qubits. Another interesting result was obtained by increasing the number of time-dependent gates within the circuit rather than increasing the number of qubits. This indicates that a system with a few qubits, containing many time-dependent gates, can provide comparable results to configurations with more qubits if they have fewer time-dependent gates. This suggests the possibility of achieving high computational efficiency in solving an ODE, even without the need for multi-qubit systems.
The work done paves the way for the study of more complex differential equations and testing further optimization strategies, such as the use of more elaborate variational circuits tailored to the specific quantum architectures currently available.
